== PerM Changelog == 

*Version 0.3.6.0*

 * Fixed an error in reading reference sequences when lowercase 'n' instead of uppercase was used for an unknown base. Closes Issue [http://code.google.com/p/perm/issues/detail?id=46 46].

*Version 0.3.5.0*

 * Increased maximum number of alignments per read (-k switch) from 2,000 to 1,000,000. Default remains 200. Closes Issue [http://code.google.com/p/perm/issues/detail?id=42 42].

 * Closed Issue [http://code.google.com/p/perm/issues/detail?id=43 43].

 * Added new --includeReadsWN switch to refine handling of reads with Ns. Previously the only options were to exclude reads with Ns or to arbitrarily substitute A for the unknown nucleotide. The new switch allows the substitution to be limited to only reads with up to a specified number of unknown bases; reads with a higher number of bases are discarded. Closes Issue [http://code.google.com/p/perm/issues/detail?id=44 44].

*Version 0.3.3.0*

 * Allow mapping to shorter reads with F1 and F2 seed. Low limit for F1 seed is now 15-bp and 20-bp reads for the F1 and F2 seed respectively. Note: mapping to such short reads can be slow. Closes Issue [http://code.google.com/p/perm/issues/detail?id=40 40].

 * -m -s $dir now saves index in the assigned directory with the default index name. Previously -s $dir caused a segmentation fault. Closes Issue [http://code.google.com/p/perm/issues/detail?id=41 41].

 * Cleaned up some messages. Closes Issue [http://code.google.com/p/perm/issues/detail?id=37 37].

*Version 0.3.2.0*

 * Changed definition of *-k* parameter to mean alignments will not be output if there are more than # alignments rather than # or more alignments. The current definition is the same as the meaning of the *-k* switch in Bowtie. To convert from using an older version of PerM, change -k # to -k #-1, e.g. *-k 5* to *-k 4*.

 * Fixed a segmentation fault that occurred when *-k 1* or *-k 2* was used with the *-a* switch. Closes Issue [http://code.google.com/p/perm/issues/detail?id=39 39].

 * The default read file names 'F3' and 'R3; are changed to 'F'; and 'R', meaning forward and reverse, in order to avoid confusion of with seed F3. 

*Version 0.3.1.0*

 * Fixed bug introduced in PerM 0.3.0.0 where reference sequence was not reverse complemented in .mapping output if read file was in FASTA format.

*Version 0.2.9.9*

 * Alignments for reads mapped to more positions than the threshold set by the *-k* switch (default 200) are no longer included in the mapping output. The new *-a* _filename_ option can be used to collect such reads. Previously, the first 200 (or *-k* specified) alignments were output to the mapping file.

 * Fixed issue with reads longer than 64 bp. Last base was ignored for reads with an odd number of bases. Closes Issue [http://code.google.com/p/perm/issues/detail?id=35 35].

*Version 0.2.9.7*

 * 6 mismatches limit for SOLID reads removed. Closes Issue [http://code.google.com/p/perm/issues/detail?id=34 34].