#labels Featured
If you have any usage question, please email "yanghoch at usc dot edu".

== CONTENTS ==  
=== [http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/Compile Compile] ===
=== [http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/Input Input Files]===
=== [http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/Output Output Files]===
=== [http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/Limitation Limitation and Future work] ===
=== [http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/Algorithms Algorithms ] ===
=== [http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/QA Q & A ] ===
== SYNOPSIS ==  
To use the command line, type PerM with the args in the order.

For single end read: {{{PerM <Ref> <Reads> [options]}}}

For [http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/single_end_example example]:
 * {{{./PerM Ref.fasta Reads.fasta -v 5 -o out.mapping}}} 
 * {{{./PerM RefFilesList.txt ReadsSetFilesList.txt -v 5 -u unmappedReads.fa -E }}} 
 * {{{./PerM Ref.fasta Reads.csfasta -v 5 -m -s my.index --delimiter ',' --seed F3}}} 
 * {{{./PerM my.index SingleEndReads.csfasta -v 5 -o out.sam}}} 

For paired end read: {{{ PerM <Ref> -1 <F3_Reads> -2 <R3_Reads> [options] }}}

For [http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/paired_end_example example]:
 * {{{./PerM ref.fa -1 F3.fa -2 R3.fa -U 3000 -L 100 -v 5 -A -m -s -o out.sam}}}
 * {{{./PerM ref.txt -1 F3.fq -2 R3.fq -v 5 -m -s my.index -o out.mapping --seed F3}}}
 * {{{./PerM my.index -1 F3.fq -2 R3.fq -U 3000 -L 100 -v 5 -A -o out.sam}}}

To build index only: {{{ PerM <Ref> <Read Length> --readFormat {.csfasta | .fasta} -m -s <index path> --seed F3}}}

For example:
 * {{{./PerM hg18.txt 50 --readFormat .csfasta -m -s hg18_50_SOLiD.index}}}

== Command Line Options ==  
==== Required Arguments ====
 # The reference file should be in fasta format with the corresponding ext name ex: .fasta, .fna. or .fa. For transcriptom with multiple genes or isoforms as reference, concatenate all fasta in a fasta file. Or, if there are many files, one for each chromosome, ex: chr1.fa to chrY.fa, list them in a .txt file, so PerM knows it is a file listing the path of multiple fasta file.  
 # The reads file should be in the .fasta, .fastq, .csfasta or .csfastq format. PerM parses a file according to it's ext file name, or the format specified by flag *{{{--readFormat <format>}}}*. If there are multiple read files, list each file names in a .txt file, with each row a path of the reads file. PerM takes it as the input and can map multiple read sets in parallel by OpenMP. 
 # Mismatch threshold could be a integer 2 or more. For reads over 64 bp, PerM allows double the number of mismatches than the given threshold.
==== Options ====
|| *-A* || || Output all alignments within the mismatch threshold, end-to-end.||
|| *-B* || || Output best alignments in terms of mismatches in the threshold. ||
|| *-E* || || Output only the uniquely mapped reads. ||
|| *-A -E* || || Output only the uniquely mapped reads. Any read with two alignments with in mismatch threshold will be ambiguous. ||
|| *-m* || || Create the reference index, without reusing the saved index. ||
|| *-s* ||_Path_|| Save the reference index to accelerate the mapping in the future. If path _P_ is not specify, the default path will be used. ||  
|| *-v* ||_Int_|| where Int i the number of mismatches allowed in one end. ||
|| *-t* ||_Int_|| Ignore the first Int base from the 5' end. Ex: if the first 5 bases is a barcode, put -t 5. Currently only work for Illumina read ||
|| *-T* ||_Int_|| Kept the first Int bases after bases ignored by -t option. Ignore the rest bases in 3' end. Ex: -T 30 means use only first 30 bases (signals) after the ignore base for -t option. ||

|| *-o* ||_Path_|| where Path is for output the mapping of one read set. PerM's output are in .mapping or .sam format, determined by the ext name of P. Ex: -o out.sam will output in SAM format; -o out.mapping will output in .mapping format.||
|| *-d* ||_Path_|| where Path is the dir for multiple read sets. ||
|| *-u* ||_Path_|| Print the fasta(fastq) file of those unmapped reads to a file. ||

====Long Options====
|| *--noSamHeader*|| ||Print no Sam header so it is convenient to concatenate multiple sam output files ||
|| *--includeReadsWN*|| || Include the reads with N or '.' by encoding N or '.' as A or 3 ||
|| *--statsOnly* || || Output the mapping statistics in stdout only, without saving alignments to files||
|| *--ignoreQS* || || Ignore the quality scores in fastq or QUAL files. ||
|| *--printNM* || || When quality are avaiable, use this flag to print number of mismatches, instead of mismatch scores in mapping format. ||
|| *--seed* ||_{F,,0,, | F,,1,, | F,,2,, | F,,3,, | F,,4,,   |     S,,11,, | S,,12,,}_|| Specify the seed pattern, which has a specific full sensitive to 0 to 4 mismatches or one SNP + one or two color mismatches. Check [http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/Algorithms the algorithm page] for seed patterns to balance the sensitivity and running time.||
|| *--refFormat* || _{fasta | list | index }_|| Take refs file in the specified format, instead of guessing according to its ext name. ||
|| *--readFormat*||_{fasta | fastq | csfasta | csfastq}_||Read in reads in the specified format, instead of guessing according to the ext name. ||
|| *--outputFormat*||_{ sam | mapping }_|| Overwrite the default output mapping format option. ||
|| *--delimiter*||_char_|| _char_ is a character used as the delimiter to separate the the read id, and the additional info in the line with '>' in fasta or csfasta. ||

[http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/single_end_example Examples]

==== Options for Paired-end Reads ==== 
PerM deals with mate-paired reads by mapping each end separately. All combination of mated paired mapping in the same ref will be printed, if their separation are in the expected ranged, specified by the upper bound and the lower bound. 

|| *-e *|| || Exclude ambiguous paired. ||
|| *-L * / *--lowerBound * ||_Int_|| mate-paired separate lower bound ||
|| *-U * / *--upperBound * ||_Int_|| mate-paired separate upper bound ||

The upper bound and lower bound can be negative, which may catch the re-arrangement variations. User should use argument {{{ -A }}} to avoid missing the correct pairs. However, this may let the running time become very slow, if both ends are in the repetitive regions. 

[http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/paired_end_example Examples]

==== Default setting ====  
The following is the default setting when the corresponding arg are not specified. Please specify the arg to change the default settings.
  * Allow only two mismatches only in each end and use seed F,,2,, S,,11,, or F,,3,, ,selected according to the read lengths and types.
  * Print the best alignments for each read in term of mismatches number. 
  * Output files in `*`.mapping format.
  * Search the saved index with the default file name, before building the new index.
  * Won't save the index in file, unless {{{-s }}} is specified. 
  * For paired end, the default is set as lower bound 0 bp and upper bound 3000 bp.
 
== Paralleled Mapping ==
PerM simultaneously maps multiple reads sets in a list by querying the same index. It will detect how many CPU (cores) are available and assign each of them a read set. If a read set is done, the next read set in the list will be processed automatically. Each read set will have its own mapping output file. To better utilize all CPUs on a node, large reads are suggested to be split to many small read sets and put in the list. 
When multiple nodes are used in the same file system, the index should be pre-built first by one node; the other node will read the pre-built index with out building index again. Without pre-built index, each machine will try to build their own index, wasting CPU hours and may cause insufficiency of disk quota. 