====./PerM Ref.fasta Reads.fasta -v 5 -o out.mapping ====
 * PerM maps reads in {{{reads.fa}}} to the reference sequences in {{{Ref.fasta}}}
 * PerM allows five mismatches, however the default [http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/Algorithms seed] chosen according to the read length, is only full sensitive to two or three mismatches. 
 * PerM first checks if the index had been saved in the default path. If yes, use it; if no, build it. It won't save the index in disk. 
 * PerM outputs to the file {{{out.mapping}}} in the [http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/Output mapping] format. 

====./PerM hg18.txt Reads.txt -v 5 -E -u Missed.fa ====
 * The {{{hg18.txt}}} should be file listing each reference fasta file in a line.
 * The {{{Reads.txt}}} should be the file listing each reads set in a line. [http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/Input more]. 
 * If your computer support [http://openmp.org/wp/ OpenMP.], PerM assigns one CPU per read set in the list, and mapped them in parallel. 
 * With flag {{{-E}}}, PerM will exclude the ambiguous mapping and output only the unique mapping, in term of number of mismatches. 
 * It allows five mismatches and output the unmapped reads to file {{{Missed.fa}}}

====./PerM Ref.fasta Reads.csfasta -v 5 -m -s my.index --delimiter ',' --seed F4 ====
 * PerM guesses the read format as _SOLiD_ read format, according to the file's ext name. 
 * One can also use flag [http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/Manual --readFormat] to specify the format too. 
 * With {{{-m -s my.index}}}, PerM builds and saves index the the file {{{my.index}}}. 
 * It uses comma as the delimiter to extract the read Id in the "header line" in the csfasta file. 
 * With {{{--seed F4}}}, PerM use the seed which is full sensitive to four mismatches to build index, which could be significantly slower than {{{F3 or S,,11,,}}} seed. 

====./PerM my.index reads.csfasta -v 5 -o out.sam ====
 * PerM reads in the saved index {{{my.index}}} and do the mapping. 
 * It output in [http://samtools.sourceforge.net/ SAM] format, according to the ext name. 
[http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/Manual Back to manual]