#labels Featured
This page lists the data set used in the paper. PerM has been tested for many other public and private data sets. For more public data sets, check [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/sra.cgi? Short read archieve], [http://solidsoftwaretools.com/gf/project/ecoli2x50/ Applied Biosystem] or [ftp://ftp.illumina.com Illumina]. In addition, here I show some mapping results of the brain   
[http://dw408k-1.cmb.usc.edu:8080/GeneList.htm brain RNA seq] result, using hg18 as the reference (change the reference, because the default ref or UCSC genome browser is hg19 now.

=== Reference ===
  * The anthracis.fasta file can be download from SOCS's webpage: [http://socs.biology.gatech.edu/Download.html SOCS ] 
  * Repeat masked and non-masked human genomes can be downloaded from UCSC's genome browser. File names are chromFaMasked.zip and chromFa.zip: [http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg18/bigZips Human Genome from UCSC]. 
=== Read files ===
  * Illumina Test data used in the revision paper [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/sra.cgi?cmd=viewer&m=data&s=viewer&run=SRR001154 SRR001154]
  * SOLiD Read Test data used in the paper. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/sra.cgi?cmd=viewer&m=data&s=viewer&run=ERR000455&search=&x=&y=&show_read=on&show_graph=on&space=color ERR00455]
The data downloaded from the NCBI SRA is in the base format. We translated the data into 
color signals in CSFASTA format. Because The data set is too large for many people to download, we provided the used proportion of data in our download section.   
  * Real SOLiD reads from B anthracis can be downloaded from SOCS's page [http://socs.biology.gatech.edu/Download.html SOCS]. 
  * Simulated SOLiD or Solexa reads can be generated using the small program in the download section. 
[http://code.google.com/p/perm/wiki/Manual Back to manual]